---
layout: post
title: Zend Framework 1.x, PHPUnit 3.4 and PHPUnit 3.7 side-by-side
---

Zend Framework 1.x will never support a version of PHPUnit greater than 3.4[^1].  This means if you have a system-wide install of PHPUnit available (likely 3.7 at the time of writing) you will be unable to use the `phpunit` command with your Zend Framework project without getting errors.

The solution to this is to do a local installation of PHPUnit 3.4 for each Zend Framework 1.x project you want to work on.  The only problem is, composer support wasn't added until PHPUnit 3.7, so installing via composer is out and you have to use PEAR.

##Default Setup

_BUT WAIT!_  I hear you cry.  _Doesn't composer have the ability to install PEAR packages_.  Yes, it does, so let's give it a try.

    cd ~/Projects
    mkdir zf-phpunit
    cd zf-phpunit
    composer init

Fill in the details until you get to the section that asks you to define your dependencies interactively, then add zendframework1, and continue:

{% flickr 8900729560 %}

Now run `composer install` and it should go off and grab a copy of zend framework 1 for you.  Once this is complete, create a new zend framework project:

    ./vendor/zendframework/zendframework1/bin/zf.sh create project .
    Creating project at ~/Projects/zf-phpunit
    Note: This command created a web project, for more information setting up your VHOST, please see docs/README

Add the composer autoloader to your `public/index.php`  and `tests/bootstrap.php` files[^2] and you should have a fully functioning zend framework 1 project.

##Running PHPUnit 3.7

zf tool has created a default test for you automatically, so lets try and run it using our system install of phpunit:

    cd tests
    phpunit --version
    # PHPUnit 3.7.21 by Sebastian Bergmann.
    phpunit

Which should give you an error something like this:

{% flickr 8900637907 %}

This is what we were expecting, this error will never be fixed, which is why we need to use PHPUnit 3.4, so let's go do that.

##The Solution

Open `composer.json` in your favourite text editor and add the following:

    "repositories": [
      {
        "type": "pear",
        "url": "http://pear.phpunit.de"
      }
    ],
    "require-dev": {
      "pear-pear.phpunit.de/PHPUnit": "3.4.*"
    }

Now run `composer update` to grab our new dependencies.  Composer should do its thing and you'll be left with PHPUnit and the latest ZendFramework 1 version in `./vendor`, and a PHPUnit 3.4 executable in `./vendor/bin/phpunit`.  So let's try running that.

{% flickr 8901787020 %}

Great! Right? Our tests ran perfectly.  Well yes, and _maybe_ no.

##Extra Credit

This will get you through almost everything, but in our particular case, we had to install a few dependencies for PHPUnit that composer doesn't seem to grab:

    {
      "repositories": [
        {
          "type": "pear",
          "url": "http://pear.symfony-project.com"
        },
        {
          "type": "pear",
          "url": "http://pear.phpunit.de"
        }
      ],
      "require": {
        "zendframework/zendframework1": "1.x"
      },
      "require-dev": {
        "pear-pear.phpunit.de/File_Iterator": "1.3.2",
        "pear-pear.phpunit.de/Text_Template": "1.1.2",
        "pear-pear.phpunit.de/PHP_CodeCoverage": "1.1.*",
        "pear-pear.phpunit.de/PHP_Timer": "1.0.3",
        "pear-pear.phpunit.de/PHPUnit_MockObject": "1.1.*",
        "pear-pear.symfony-project.com/YAML": "1.0.2",
        "pear-pear.phpunit.de/PHPUnit": "3.4.*"
      }
    }

Run `composer update` again and you should have everything installed that you need to use PHPUnit 3.4 for your project.

## Read Next

* [Composer & Zend Framework 1.x](/2013/04/08/composer-and-zend-framework-1.x.html)

[^1]: http://framework.zend.com/issues/browse/ZF-11871
[^2]: See: [Composer & Zend Framework 1.x](/2013/04/08/composer-and-zend-framework-1.x.md) to get Zend Framework working with Composer
